The matrix that describes the coordinates of the principal components
in the original basis is the matrix of factor exposures.
The matrix of data transformed into the new language is the matrix of factor returns.
How do we calculate the factor returns?
Well, we multiply the original data by the transpose of the factor exposures matrix.
Remember, that for the risk model,
we need to calculate the factor covariance matrix.
How do we do that? Well, we have the matrix of factors.
We just calculate their covariance the same way we always calculate a covariance matrix.
Remember that since the factors are projections of the data onto the PCs,
the factors are orthogonal,
just as the principal components are orthogonal.
This means that the factor covariance matrix is a diagonal matrix.
This is true for PCA,
but not necessarily true for other types of factor models.
Finally, remember that the factors are returns time series.
They don't necessarily have direct interpretations in the physical world,
but you can think of them as returns time series for
some latent or unknown driver of return variance.
If the returns time series are daily returns,
then when we calculate their variances,
we have estimates of the factor returns variances on a daily basis.
Typically, we annualize these by multiplying the whole matrix by an annualization factor.
Remember, we don't need the square root of the factor because
our numbers here are variances, not standard deviations.
So if we were going from daily to annualized,
we'd multiply by 252.
Lastly, we need to calculate the idiosyncratic or specific risk matrix.
We know that what's leftover from our model is
the original returns data minus the part we represent with the PCs.
To calculate the specific risk matrix,
we calculate the covariance matrix of the residuals,
and set the off-diagonal elements to zero.
Since we set the off-diagonal elements to zero,
we now do not have a perfect re-creation of the covariance matrix of the original data.
But this is reasonable because we try to capture as much of the correlation
in the data as possible with the principal components that we decided to keep.